Hello friends
In this video we are going to discuss about the decimal number system
Humans used a decimal number system on their day to day life
It is called  the base 10 number system
and it  will have numbers from 0 to 9
In general base N number system will have numbers from 0 to N-1
For example base 2 number system consists of numbers 0 and 1 which is 2-1
And base 8 number system consists of numbers from 0 to 7 which is 8-1
We have represented numbers from 0 to 9
using the decimal number system
But if we need to express numbers beyond 9, what can we do?
For that, we can use positional decimal numbers.
See an example
We have 18 to the base 10
that is 18  is a decimal number
Here the position of 8 is 0 and position of 1 is 1
The position count starts from the right side of a number
and in this system the numbers can be represented as a sum
Here we have the number 18
Let us represent it as a sum
we can write 1 X 10 ^1 + 8 x 10 ^0
which is 1 x 10 + 8 x 1
that is 10 + 8 which is our number
So all the numbers in decimal system can be represented as a sum like this
Here what we're doing is, we take each digit
and multiply with 10 raised to its position number
See another example
We have 145
here the position of 5 is 0,  4 is 1 and  1 is 2
So we can represent this number as
1 X 10 ^2 + 4 x 10 ^1 + 5 x 10 ^0
that is 1 x 100 + 4 x 10 + 5 x 1
which is 100 + 40 + 5
which is our number 145.
So that was about whole numbers
Now what will happen with fractional numbers or decimal numbers?
For an example we have the number 125.67
which is a decimal number
in this case the position after dot will be counted as -1,-2, and so on
Hence the position of 6 here is -1
And the position of 7 is -2
The position of 5 will be 0
the position of 2 is 1 and finally the position of 1 is 2
Now let us represent it as a sum
Again it is the same idea
Take the digit and multiply it with 10 raised to its position number
So we will get 1 X 10 ^2 + 2 x 10 ^1 + 5 x 10 ^0 + 6 x 10^-1 + 7 x 10^-2
which is 100 + 20 + 5 + 0.6 + 0.07
which gives the sum 125.67 which is our number.
So that was decimal number system
It is also called as the base 10 number system
and we have the numbers 0 to 9 in the system.
We can represent any number in decimal system as a sum
So that's all
And in the next video we will discuss about the binary number system
So that's all for this video and thank you for watching.